[Music]
in the last episode of this series I
talked about the appeal of professional
wrestling a form of entertainment that
disguises itself as a sport in this
episode I'm gonna talk about NASCAR a
sport which tries to disguise itself as
entertaining today
NASCAR's Monster Energy Cup Series tours
around the country racing in front of
mostly empty arenas as sponsorships and
television ratings continue to wane at
least with professional wrestling while
not many fans enjoy it anymore there's
still at least a small nucleus of people
that still care about it
it's nearly impossible to find anyone
these days who actually cares about
NASCAR hold on I'm gonna give my best
NASCAR noise impression most people upon
hearing the name NASCAR immediately
think of a dumb sport where dumb
rednecks watch cars go around in circles
but I'm here to tell you that's wrong
the cars actually go around in ovals in
all seriousness though it ain't easy
being a NASCAR fan it ain't easy having
to constantly justify to people why you
like something that's about as popular
as licorice there was once a time when
many more people liked NASCAR but that
time has long since passed the vacuous
boredom often associated with the sport
today has paradoxically created intrigue
for reasons why anyone would even like
it in the first place trying to convince
anybody to actually care about NASCAR as
a pretty tall order but that won't stop
me from trying because there's one
driver in the sports turbulent history
that truly embodies all of the reasons
why NASCAR was at one time the second
most popular sport in America this is
the story of Dale Earnhardt
[Music]
many of my viewers like to draw
comparisons between me and a writer by
the name of John boys and it's pretty
fair comparison
considering John boys is one of my
biggest inspirations as a creator today
last Halloween John wrote a short story
about a pitcher who sells his soul to
Satan and falls away from the earth in
the middle of a baseball game while this
story is clearly a work of fiction it is
eerily comparable to the real life and
death of Dale Earnhardt our story begins
in the rural American town of Kannapolis
North Carolina sometime in the late
1960s a young Dale Earnhardt drops out
of high school and uses what little
money he has to start competing at
locally sanctioned dirt track races
Earnhardt most likely shares the same
lofty unobtainable pipe dream as all of
his competitors to work his way up the
ranks and eventually race in the top
series of NASCAR NASCAR like Dale
Earnhardt had its origins in the rural
American South the roots of the sport
can be traced back to the Prohibition
era where moonshiners attempting to
smuggle barrels of illegal whiskey would
tune up their cars to be able to outrun
police when Prohibition ended in the
1930s the smugglers were left with
nothing to do but race each other small
unsanctioned races began to take place
all across the south but perhaps no
other place became a more popular racing
destination than Daytona Beach Florida
the beaches of Daytona feature finely
grained sand that forms a hard compact
surface ideal for auto racing in the
early 20th century automotive engineers
would use the beaches of Daytona to try
to break the land speed record
eventually record attempts would migrate
to the salt flats of Bonneville Utah
leaving Daytona open for a new frontier
of stock car racing
stock car racing differs greatly from
other racing series such as IndyCar or
Formula One these types of open wheel
racing feature expertly crafted machines
specifically designed to maximize speed
and handling while open wheel machines
require an impressive degree of skill
and finesse to operate their design also
leaves them very fragile rendering them
virtually unable to contact each other
on the track as even a slight tap can
produce a scrapyard of wrecked race cars
because of this open wheel racers rarely
ever touch resulting in very clean and
fluid racing stock cars are pretty much
the complete opposite it essentially
asked the question of what would happen
if you bought a car from the dealership
and started racing it naturally consumer
grade cars are much more bulky and less
aerodynamically dependent than their
open wheel counterparts this allows
stock cars to take much more of a
beating while still remaining
competitive leading to a style of racing
that is slower but much more durable and
contact heavy it's a style of racing
that started to become wildly popular in
the American South and perhaps no other
man was more responsible for the rise of
American stock car racing than Bill
France
bill France was a fan of stock car
racing since the days of his youth and
the roaring 20s where he would skip
school to drive laps in his parents
Model T when the Great Depression struck
big bill would flee to Daytona with less
than $100 to his name but he was able to
stay afloat by racing cars on the beach
eventually bill France would transition
from race driver to race promoter and on
February 21st 1948 he revolutionized
American Motorsports by founding the
National Association for stock car auto
racing NASCAR before NASCAR stock car
racing mostly featured scattered and
disorganized events with inconsistent
rules with no major governing body to
sanction races there was nothing
stopping some promoters from just not
paying drivers the winnings they were
owed NASCAR changed all of this by
organizing a unified schedule of racing
events complete with a singular rule set
championship point system and guaranteed
driver winnings
NASCAR truly became the first legitimate
stock her racing league in America and
all of a sudden the allure of earning
fame and fortune through a life of
racing began to attract drivers from far
and wide one of these drivers was a
young Ralph Earnhardt who in 1953
started racing full-time in NASCAR's
sportsman series Ralph
Earnhardt's talent on quarter-mile dirt
tracks made him a regional racing star
in the Carolinas and even want him the
sportsman Series championship in 1956
and even though he would use his racing
talent to single-handedly lift himself
out of poverty he surprisingly didn't
wish the same destiny upon his son Dale
Earnhardt both Ralph and Dale grew up in
Kannapolis North Carolina a town so
rural that it wasn't even incorporated
until 1984 before that almost everyone
born into this place had no way out
only Ralph learn hurts Racing talent
could save him from a lifelong career at
the local cotton mill Dale Earnhardt saw
his father as his greatest inspiration
and he saw racing as his only real
ticket to success Ralph Earnhardt didn't
want his son to race despite his own
talent in the sport talent is a very
rare thing
if everyone were talented no one would
be Ralph Earnhardt probably knew this
and if he had his way Dale Earnhardt
would have quit racing to graduate high
school and get a nice desk job in the
big city he probably never expected his
son to become one of the greatest
drivers ever he never lived to see it
either just 20 years after he began
racing full-time Ralph Earnhardt died of
a heart attack
Dale Earnhardt could have followed his
father's wishes and if he did he'd
probably still be around today but
instead he chose to follow in his
father's footsteps and in trying to
prove to his late father that he
belonged in a race car
Dale Earnhardt would accidentally become
one of the best in the world just six
years later he found himself at the
crossroads of history
[Music]
covering a city block huh second in rush
hour traffic tickle look at that
Earnhardt blazes back into the front of
the
years are not your leader
a turn for even at the very beginning of
Dale Earnhardt's rookie season in the
NASCAR Winston Cup Series his talent was
undeniable for a moment he found himself
leading the 21st annual Daytona 500
which may have been the most important
race in the history of NASCAR Daytona
International Speedway is quite possibly
the greatest arena ever constructed by
man the scale of this place is difficult
to describe but let's just say it's big
enough to be sunny on one end and stormy
on the other this modern-day Coliseum is
the fruit of one of the most ambitious
engineering projects of the 20th century
conceived from the outrageous
imagination of none other than Bill
France after 20 years of watching sloppy
races on the beach bill France sought to
construct a racetrack where drivers
would never have to let off the throttle
the result was a 2.5 mile long tri-oval
surrounded by a 31 degree embankment the
sheer size of these corners is downright
intimidating it looks like you have a
hard time walking up them let alone
driving on them the mere architecture of
this place boggles the mind today so you
could only imagine the amazement of the
42,000 spectators who witnessed the
inaugural running of the Daytona 500 the
pure spectacle of almost 60 stock cars
barreling around an asphalt Bowl at 135
miles per hour was something that no one
had ever seen before
and after an unforgettable photo finish
the Daytona 500 immediately established
itself as the most prestigious event on
the NASCAR schedule for every stock car
driver in America a win at Daytona is
the pot of gold at the end of the
rainbow at the time of its opening in
1959 Daytona International Speedway was
the largest track of its kind
ten years later Bill France would build
an even bigger one in Talladega Alabama
and while Talladega Superspeedway would
also go on to be very popular with fans
it would not displace the Daytona 500 as
NASCAR's crown jewel event and that's
why in 1979 CBS selected to broadcast
the full race live in front of a
national audience it would be the first
live broadcast of an entire 500-mile
Motorsports event in the history of
American television
NASCAR found itself in a perfect storm
of circumstances quite
as on the day of the race a blizzard
left most of the eastern US stuck
indoors with nothing to do but watch the
Daytona 500 an estimated 15 million
viewers tuned in to this race and for a
brief moment some of them got to see an
unknown driver by the name of Dale
Earnhardt leading the race while his
father dominated on short tracks
Dale Earnhardt would find his greatest
success on the big ones even though they
would also provide him with his greatest
turmoil he didn't know it at the time
nor did anybody else watching but Dale
Earnhardt was cursed this is the story
of a person at a place a racers
relationship with a racetrack this was
merely the first chapter of Dale vs.
Daytona Earnhardt would go on to finish
eighth out of 41 drivers in this race
not bad for his very first attempt at
NASCAR's most coveted prize Dale
Earnhardt's rookie effort would be
reduced to an afterthought however as
everyone's attention was instead drawn
to perhaps the greatest finish in the
history of NASCAR let's all come down to
this Donnie Allison in person where will
Cale make his will
that's him
Richard Petty
and here comes a $60,000 car becoming a
22 passenger school bus to bring his
crew to Victory Lane and there's a fight
between Cale Yarborough and Donnie
Allison the tempers over boy they're
angry they know they have lost and what
a bitter defeat in just a matter of
minutes the television audience got to
experience dramatic racing a crash an
unforgettable last lap pass NASCAR's
most iconic drivers setting an
unbreakable record and a bare-knuckle
fist fight all on live TV all of a
sudden the colloquial regional sport of
NASCAR found itself with a national
audience the finish made it all the way
to the front page of the New York Times
sports section and NASCAR would never be
the same the 1979 season saw Dale
Earnhardt capture his first career win
in just a 16th start he would win the
Rookie of the Year award for that season
and go on to finish seventh in the
overall standings in a year where
Richard Petty won his seventh and final
Winston Cup championship at this point
in time Richard Petty is unanimously
regarded as the greatest driver in the
history of the sport looking at it today
his career statistics seem almost
mythical Petty's 200 career victories
are almost doubled the next driver in
NASCAR's all-time win list and his 7
Series championships were at the time
more than double any other driver after
the 1979 season the mere notion of any
other driver challenging Petty's throne
as the greatest of all time was
laughable but if anyone were to do it it
would have to be a driver the likes of
which no one had ever seen number two is
currently the leader
a victory and hopefully to pick up some
additional points as he is on his way in
his sophomore year when I told you
[Music]
in 1980 Dale Earnhardt's shocked
everyone by winning the Winston Cup
Series championship in just a second
full time season only the 15th different
driver to achieve the title of NASCAR
champion already in his young career
Dale Earnhardt had joined some elite
company but he would soon learn that
even when you're great you're still a
long way from the best although he began
with one of the greatest starts to any
career in NASCAR history
Earnhardt's car owner rod sterlen would
unexpectedly sell his race team midway
through the 1981 season Earnhardt
reacted poorly to this transition and
struggled for the next few seasons while
bouncing from owner to owner after going
winless in 1981 Dale Earnhardt had the
worst statistical season of his career
the following season finishing the 1982
campaign with an abysmal average finish
of 19th while failing to finish more
than half of his races for the year
after such a promising beginning
Earnhardt's Winston Cup career had
slammed straight into a concrete wall
[Music]
Jayne's machine one of Earnhardt's 18
dns for the season resulted from a
violent crash at Pocono that sent his
number 15 Ford's skidding on its roof
down the embankment of the first corner
the accident would fracture his kneecap
but it wouldn't stop the scrappy
Earnhardt from racing the very next week
at Talladega
where he would suffer another hard crash
this was surely the most trying time of
Earnhardt's racing career many at this
time began to wonder whether Earnhardt's
1980 championship was just a fluke but
Dale Earnhardt was not like the other
drivers he wasn't racing for the fame or
the fortune he was racing to prove that
he belonged he was racing to prove
himself to his late father and when a
man is dead set on accomplishing an
impossible task he will never stop
chasing it when faced with the lowest
moment of his career
Dale Earnhardt did what he always did he
waited for an opportunity and pushed
forward
why
they're a brilliant maneuver by Bernard
checkered flag belongs
stock car racing is all-time winner for
Richard Petty
you need a mower go with a bit go with
low you'll be a winner at Lowe's every
weekend
America there is great NASCAR racing
I wouldn't be anywhere else
[Music]
okay
hey we were watching that
join the club today and you'll see by
2019 won't be like 1984 in 1984 Dale
Earnhardt found himself with a new owner
Richard Childress and a new car number
three he would stick with both of them
for the rest of his career
under Childress Earnhardt's career would
immediately begin to rebound and it
would mark the beginning of his finest
era by 1986
Bernhard would be champion once more
becoming just the 11th driver in history
to win multiple nascar championships in
1987 he had the best statistical season
of his career finishing the year with 11
wins and his third Cup championship and
after this dominant season Earnhardt
would return in black embracing his new
role as the Intimidator now would
probably be a good time to explain what
exactly made Dale Earnhardt such a
potent racer well Dale Earnhardt first
learned his racing style from watching
his father slide around on dirt tracks
and he never really unlearned it
remember earlier how I mentioned that
the durability of stock cars allows them
to more easily bump into each other well
Dale Earnhardt would take this idea and
turn his vehicle into a weapon
Earnhardt would make frequent use of the
bump and run a racing tactic where a
driver uses the inertia of their own car
to move other drivers out of the way and
advance their position it's a maneuver
that's practically unheard of in
open-wheel racing because it's really
only possible in a series like NASCAR
even within NASCAR the bumping run is
still a highly controversial move racing
purists consider it a dirty tactic as it
detracts from the skill of outlining
your competitors other fans view it as a
valid and necessary part of stock car
racing considering it's a viable
strategy that's not against the rules
your outlook of this issue most likely
determine whether or not you were a fan
of Dale Earnhardt
as his frequent use of the bump-and-run
quickly made him one of the most
polarizing drivers in NASCAR and as
notoriety would only grow as it became
one of the most dominant drivers in the
sport for many drivers nothing was
scarier than seeing Dale Earnhardt in
your rear-view mirror if you saw the
number three Chevy behind you you would
either get out of his way or he wouldn't
make you get out of his way for many
years Earnhardt was NASCAR's greatest
heel it's not fair and you know the
thing of it is you go out you run as
hard as you can all day long and then
him trying to cut you out they outrun it
that ain't the way I was brought up
right if you weren't an Earnhardt van it
was probably very easy to hate him
because there was a good chance you
could recall a time when he wrecked your
favorite driver despite Earnhardt's
tendency to enforce his will upon other
drivers on the track he certainly had
his fair share of supporters
Dale Earnhardt raced in real life how
anybody races the first time they pick
up a NASCAR video game the other drivers
were just obstacles separating him from
first place many fans found Earnhardt's
cavalier style endearing and relatable
he would struggle and claw for every
single position much like how many fans
in the poor American South had to
struggle for every paycheck who cares if
he bangs up some other cars he's just
trying to win like the rest of them an
uneducated small-town hick with no other
prospects trying to turn lemons into
lemonade for anyone stuck in rural
America
Earnhardt represented the way-out
standing outside of his car Earnhardt
was just like them but as soon as he
stepped inside that black number three
he transformed into erasing God
a lot of Earnhardt's detractors pointed
to his racing style as an unfair crutch
but eventually for anyone watching long
enough his talent was undisputable
although Dale earnheardt remains one of
the most memorable NASCAR drivers to
this day he was never the most popular
driver that distinction belonged to Bill
Elliott you know the thing of it is I
have been not the aggressive driver
all my life you know I've tried to give
and tight with a basket of thing but
when a guy cut child that bad
and that obvious it's found the type of
a chief awesome bill from Dawsonville
Georgia was in many ways a foil to Dale
Earnhardt he too came from a racing
family and rose to prominence in the 80s
as one of NASCAR's best the soft-spoken
and humble Elliott contrasted heavily
with the outspoken and brash Earnhardt
whereas Earnhardt would gain notoriety
for his combative racing style the name
of Elliott's game was speed over the
past decade in NASCAR the overall speeds
of the race cars had gradually risen
especially on the giant super speedways
of Daytona and Talladega in 1984 Cale
Yarborough became the first stock car
driver in history to set a 200
mile-per-hour qualifying lap at Daytona
the very next lap he will lose control
and total his race car as the speeds
crept upwards the drivers crept ever
closer to the edge of control despite
the newfound risk NASCAR's top speeds
continue to climb with each new Super
Speedway event engineers and crews would
roll out ever so faster cars and from
1985 to 1987 no car was faster than bill
Elliott's red and white Ford Thunderbird
perhaps his most stunning achievement
came in the 1985 Winston 500 when
Elliott cut an oil line and fell two
laps behind the leaders only to make up
the entire deficit under green and win
the race
his car was simply that much faster than
the others in modern times nobody has
monopolized NASCAR racing like Bill
Elliott he has raced around this season
faster than a person throwing double
sixes two years later at the same event
Bill Elliott would set NASCAR's all-time
speed record two hundred twelve point
eight miles per hour
[Music]
for comparison the poll speed for the
Indianapolis 500 that same year the
fastest open-wheel race was 2:15 it's
also important to note that on average a
stock car weighs about twice as much as
an Indy car there's been a pretty big
elephant in the room during this whole
video so far I've talked on and on about
the history of NASCAR but I've yet to
explain why people actually like it I
mean sure it's easy to cherry-pick the
sports most exciting moments but what
about the other 99% of the time is just
regular old fashioned racing what's the
appeal of watching cars go around in
circles well long story short people
don't watch a NASCAR for the same
reasons they watch other sports you can
pick up a football and start playing
right now in your backyard you can't
just hop in a NASCAR and start racing
people in order to understand the appeal
of NASCAR we have to talk about soldiers
astronauts and prestige being a soldier
comes with a certain amount of prestige
most people find their sacrifice
admirable but you don't have to search
far to find people who disagree you'd be
hard-pressed however to find anyone who
doubts the prestige of an astronaut you
can talk about intelligence and science
degrees and technical skill all you want
but the fact of the matter is that
soldiers fight against other soldiers
and man-made wars while astronauts fight
against the surly bonds of nature itself
it takes bravery to volunteer yourself
to go fight in some far-off foreign land
but it takes a whole nother level of
bravery to strap yourself into a
pressurized metal canister and fly out
of the top of the sky astronauts have so
much prestige because they come the
closest to kissing the snarling jaws of
certain death there's no denying that
war is also deadly but humans have been
fighting and killing each other since
the dawn of man it's easy to understand
the nature of warfare it's difficult to
understand the limits of nature itself
and nothing is more terrifying than what
we don't understand ah Who am I kidding
this is a dumb analogy NASCAR drivers
are nothing like astronauts I mean come
on
have you ever seen a NASCAR fly
[Music]
in the race immediately corresponding
with Bill Eliot's record-breaking
qualifying lap Bobby Allison would blow
a tire in the tri-oval the back of his
car would lift off the ground and sail
into the catch fence at nearly 200 miles
per hour it turns out that if you spin a
car sideways at a fast enough speed the
aerodynamics will force the car aloft
like the wing of an airplane in the 1987
Winston 500 the 210 mile per hour pace
was enough to lift up Bobby Allison's
3500 pound race car like a piece of
paper for a brief surreal moment all of
NASCAR Stood Still by pure chance
Allison's left front fender clipped the
wall the instant before the back of his
car hit the catch fence which redirected
the momentum of his car away from the
spectators had Allison spun at just a
slightly different angle we could have
witnessed a tragedy on the scale of the
1955 LeMond disaster where an
out-of-control race car was projected
into the stands at a very high speed
eighty-three spectators were killed in
the catastrophe fleeting many European
nations to place a temporary ban on all
Motorsports
to this day it remains the deadliest
accident in racing history Allison's car
had sheared a 100-foot gap in the
protective fencing and NASCAR fans found
themselves staring into an eerie window
of what could have happened
miraculously only five spectators were
injured and no one was killed
the line between driver and spectator
had been severed and it could have ended
NASCAR entirely
fortunately NASCAR would make good use
of their second chance as the era of
speed came to a permanent end
[Music]
this accident would force NASCAR to
implement restrictor plates at all
future Super Speedway races which would
limit the horsepower of all cars to keep
them below dangerous speeds this would
profoundly change the way drivers raced
at Daytona and Talladega gone were the
days of Bill Elliott making up five
miles under green restrictor plates made
it so that cars could no longer pull
away from each other instead emphasizing
the attractive effects of slipstream
simple racing moves such as passing were
now drastically altered as timing and
aerodynamics were now much more
important than speed and handling
restrictor ate it all up it made
everybody the same speed and that made
it so probably more dangerous than with
him naturally many drivers were unhappy
with this new change and no driver hated
restrictor plate racing more than Dale
Earnhardt which was a little odd
considering he was the best restrictor
plate race err on the planet
[Music]
it was one of the most dominant runs of
any race category in motorsports history
and it happened during a time when
NASCAR had arguably its toughest ever
competition the 90s truly were a golden
age of NASCAR in popular culture
attendance and television ratings
steadily rose as movies like Days of
Thunder drew intrigue from across the
nation big brands and TV networks were
lining up to capture their own slice of
the booming NASCAR scene NASCAR had gone
fully national and it had fundamentally
transformed itself from a simple
showcase of speed in the prior decade
the sponsors drivers tracks and cars had
all changed but one thing remained the
same Dale Earnhardt was dominating the
competition from 1990 to 1994
Dale Earnhardt would win four more Cup
championships tying Richard Petty's
record of seven a record considered by
many to be untouchable just ten years
prior with each new championship it
became harder and harder for people to
disregard Earnhardt success although
many still resented his racing Seidel
you can't win seven NASCAR championships
without being a pretty talented driver
Earnhardt's detractors were simply
running out of excuses to denies
greatness soon there was only one thing
keeping Dale out of the conversation for
the greatest of all time I've you've not
won Daytona right
I've won Daytona the Firecracker race in
July but I haven't won the Daytona 500
that's like the Superbowl race for us
[Music]
after 17 years of effort the Daytona 500
belongs to Franklin Tennessee
he's done in 1989 darrell waltrip won
his first and only daytona 500 in a 17th
attempt at the time he was considered
the best driver to never win it and
after he did everyone was left to wonder
about the next best driver to take
Waltrip's place immediately
many thought of Dale Earnhardt who had
yet to win the Daytona 500 after 11
tries but surely in 1990 while entering
the final corner of the final lap in
first place after leading three-quarters
of the race Earnhardt could put the
narrative to rest they still run
single-file halfway down the back
straightaway half a lap to go still
Earnhardt now stretching his lead by
another car lengths over cope the body
can't do anything with Derrick
[Music]
jail what the heck happened on the last
lap we've run over some debris and cut a
right rear tire down dated just a
quarter of a lap away from victory in
1991 Earnhardt would damage his car
after hitting a seagull forcing him to
pit he would battle all the way back to
second place before crashing with two
laps to go Dale Earnhardt fails to win
the Daytona 500 again in 1992 Earnhardt
would get caught up in a crash that
wasn't his fault a newfound consequence
of restrictor plate racing were massive
crashes that would often wipe out over a
dozen cars after a while these crashes
seemed almost inevitable due to the
extremely close pack racing that now
resembled rush-hour traffic but at a
hundred 90 miles per hour
one slight error by a single driver
could spark a chain reaction that would
take many cars out of the race it was
one of our hearts main reasons for
hating restrictor plate racing and he
would fall victim to it numerous times
in 1993 Earnhardt would once again lead
most of the race only to finish second
after Dale Jarrett passed him on the
final lap after a seventh place finish
in 94 Earnhardt would finish second
again in 1995 and again in 1996 later in
the 96 season Earnhardt would suffer a
horrific looking crash that sent his
number 3 Chevy tumbling down the
Talladega front stretch
[Music]
Dale Earnhardt attempting to walk to the
ambulance as he walks away from one of
the worst incidents in his racing career
well it was known that Dale Earnhardt
hated restrictor plate racing it was
starting to look like restrictor plate
racing hated him we get the right help
we're at the right place right times
like I just don't record I said what do
you think you know when better than that
days he said I've been here a lot of
times before and you can bet he's been
in the full pan right now with that
throttle pedal but if it's racing God's
time the shadownet three we'll just have
to see as was the formula at this point
Earnhardt ran up front all day and found
himself in a battle for the lead with
just a few laps to go and all of a
sudden he found himself on his roof once
again
down the back straightaway big
and over number three and for the 19th
time Lady Luck heals a bad hand I'm not
sure I actually believe in curses but
Dale Earnhardt's misfortune and the
Daytona 500 really made me consider it
for some wicked reason the seven-time
NASCAR champion and best super speedway
racer in the world could not for the
life of him win this one super speedway
race
Earnhardt's gut-wrenching futility at
this one event is made even more insane
when you consider that he's the
winningest driver in the history of the
track no seriously
by 1997 Earnhardt had won pretty much
every stocker event at Daytona multiple
times over all except the one that
mattered most after 19 tries and 19
failures he should have been completely
discouraged but Dale Earnhardt was not a
quitting man he wasn't even willing to
quit this race
[Music]
this thing is so beat up it really can
make
it's an absolute miracle even though he
no longer had any chance of winning
Dale Earnhardt would hop out of the
ambulance and back into his mangled car
to finish the race when faced with the
lowest moment of his career Dale
Earnhardt did what he always did he
waited for an opportunity and pushed
forward
[Music]
there's a slow car up ahead and their
trouble coming off the turn to do some
together 20 years of trying 20 years of
frustration
[Applause]
every man on every crew has come out to
the edge of pit lane
to congratulate the man who has
dominated everything there is to win in
this sport except this race until today
they used to Moo Dale Earnhardt when he
was winning too much that'll happen if
you dominate any sport but today when
they introduced the Intimidator
the crowd was full of cheers for all men
race fans and all them people have been
saying Dale this is you here Dale this
is year and boy a lot of them said it
this year the Daytona 500 is ours we've
won it we've won it we won
the hangover from Earnhardt's Daytona
500 victory lasted throughout the 1998
season where Dale would not win another
race and finish a distant eighth and
points perhaps overcoming the single
greatest foe in his racing career was a
little demotivating after winning the
500 yard had almost nothing left to
accomplish he could have tried for
another championship breaking the tie
with Richard Petty but both he and a lot
of others began to tell that his age was
starting to get the best of him later in
the 98 season Earnhardt suffered his
second hard crash at Talladega in two
years in the post race interview
Earnhardt for the first time ever
sounded fed up exhausted and demoralized
what was the day like up to that point
good it's not good racing no no y'all
can talk about all you want ain't good
racing in 1999 earned her would
infamously dump Terry Labonte to win at
Bristol
[Music]
any goodwill he had from his crowning
achievement just a year prior had worn
out its welcome as Aaron Hart was
showered in a chorus of boos from the
140,000 in attendance
[Music]
at this point Earnhardt and the fans had
a mutual yearning for something new I'm
never doing heart after he just wanted
that hard 500 what's the question dude
while Dale earnheardt never achieved his
dream of racing alongside his father he
was able to race alongside his son Dale
Earnhardt jr. made his full-time Winston
Cup debut in 2000 under his father's own
race team Dale jr. captured his first
career win in just his 12th overall
start almost 21 years to the day of his
father's first win in victory lane that
day
Dale senior appeared to take more pride
in his sons accomplishment than any of
his own racing with his son seemed to
renew Dale Earnhardt's sense of purpose
some would say that's all he ever really
wanted to race side-by-side with his own
flesh and blood
and although the aging Earnhardt was
nearing the end of his career he would
still make you think twice about
questioning his greatness
[Music]
a hard time to come up
straight
[Music]
[Applause]
legend has it that Dale Earnhardt was so
good at restrictor plate racing because
he could see the air coming off of the
other cars and used this ability to
perfectly time his passes
Dale Earnhardt 76th and final career win
came fittingly in a restrictor plate
race at Talladega take a look at this
moment that is Michael Waltrip out of
control try oval into a series of
Sidewinders nine shattering snap-roll
prior to the start of the 2001 season de
I signed Michael Waltrip to drive the
number 15 Chevy Michael Waltrip had
spent his entire career racing in the
shadow of his older brother Darrell and
after 15 lackluster seasons Michael
Waltrip was still seeking his first
career win
Dale Earnhardt believed in Michael
however and he would open 2001 racing
not just with his son but with his team
I think all of you know what happens
next it was probably the only thing you
knew about Dale Earnhardt on 1 February
afternoon
Dale Earnhardt what enters black number
three for the final time
[Music]
you
this kind of racing is gonna happen
crash on the back straightaway that
began when Tony Stewart got turned
sideways against the backstretch wall
number 20
when it gets hit by every car in the
fields inviting Tony Stewart's car just
took away love around
ganya Paula because there's no place to
go incidentally the crash would leave
Dale earnheardt in third position behind
the Dei cars of Dale jr. and Michael
Waltrip as the laps wound down everyone
began to realize that Dale Earnhardt
wasn't trying to win the race rather he
was holding back the rest of the field
so that his team could win instead Dale
managed to hold off everybody until the
final corner of the final lap the
cameras cut away from the accident it
should have been one of the happiest
moments in NASCAR history as Darrell
Waltrip joyfully commentated his
brothers first win on the grandest stage
of all a storybook ending to a
picturesque day of thrilling
action-packed racing and then the
cameras cut the Dale Earnhardt's
crumpled vehicle lying at rest in the
infield grass nobody knew it at the time
but the greatest tragedy in NASCAR
history had just occurred Dale Earnhardt
NASCAR's greatest driver was dead at 49
this is undoubtedly one of the toughest
announcements that I've ever personally
had to make but after the accident in
turn four at the end of the Daytona 500
we've lost Dale Earnhardt
[Music]
the official cause of death is listed as
a basilar skull fracture sustained as a
result of blunt force trauma when Dale
Earnhardt's struck the turn for a wall
he died instantly looking back on it all
today it's hard to believe it even
happened
Dale Earnhardt was NASCAR's Ironman the
toughest driver in the sport he hadn't
missed a race since his rookie season he
walked away from this and this why did
he die from this how did no one die from
this crash earlier in the race well at
over 190 miles per hour destinies can be
profoundly altered by a matter of inches
NASCAR's greatest tragedy was avoided by
inches and NASCAR's greatest tragedy was
caused by inches in the lap 173 crash
Dale Earnhardt was just inches away from
getting collected ironically you've
earned her to just been a little less
fortunate here it's likely that he would
still be alive today I remember him
coming on there and I came to memory
Fitz before since a wreck happened or
during there caught the red flag but he
said Richard if they don't do something
to these cars it's going to end up
killing somebody
Dale Earnhardt was always aware of
NASCAR's darkest secret
you just never imagined that he'd be the
one reminding everyone of the truth
NASCAR is caked with the blood of dead
drivers the reason NASCAR was so
compelling was because it was deadly
obviously no one actively wished death
upon drivers but it was mutually
understood as an inherent risk of
gliding around in a 3,500 pound hunk of
metal at 190 miles per hour every few
years or so a driver would unexpectedly
die in a race since the very beginning
of the sport this was the dark reality
in the back of everyone's mind you never
wanted to see it happen but when it did
you accepted it as inevitable and moved
on Dale's death was very different
though many racing fans still haven't
moved on it was just too painful the
biggest icon in racing dying in the
middle of the biggest event imagine of
Michael Jordan died during the NBA
Finals or if Tom Brady died during the
Superbowl this is what it felt like
watching Dale Earnhardt die in the
Daytona 500 and in my humble opinion is
the single worst tragedy in the history
of American sports
even though Dale Earnhardt's death was a
devastating shock for the millions of
fans watching you could at least take
solace and knowing that he probably
wouldn't have wanted to go out any other
way Dale Earnhardt died doing what he
loved and his final memory was watching
his own drivers speeding towards the
finish line with nothing but open
racetrack in front of them
I think they learned hard is the best
race driver it's ever been and stock-car
how do you feel about that yeah that's a
big statement
I had him you know I think my dad was
the greatest when it comes to racers for
as much as he accomplished
no one knew for sure Dale ever felt he
proved himself to his father it's a
burden he took to his grave leaving us
to wonder about Dale much in the same
way Dale had to wonder about Ralph the
only thing we know for sure is that Dale
finally caught up with his father's
ghost the story doesn't end here
although NASCAR suffered perhaps its
greatest of her loss they still had 35
more races to run that season when faced
with their lowest moment NASCAR had no
other option but to push forward
[Music]
scores the second straight
corporated with an urn hard hat in his
hand Steve Parker drive to Victory Lane
[Music]
a year ago with Dale Earnhardt and Bobby
Labonte
kevin harvick as the band saluted Dale
laughs he'll the department salutes upon
the way the Victory Lane in following
him that run hang out again
what could be more fitting
could be more special
[Music]
[Applause]
here they come turn
[Music]
[Applause]
and with the most cathartic moment in
NASCAR history
Dale Earnhardt jr. would win at the
track that took his father's life just
five months earlier for many fans this
win was enough to heal the wounds from
the tragedy of that year's Daytona 500
some fans thought this finish was
literally too good to be true and that
NASCAR rigged it a compelling theory
until you consider the years of Dei
restrictor plate dominance that followed
from 2001 through 2003 Dei carried the
torch of Dale Earnhardt's restrictor
plate prowess by winning nine of the
twelve Super Speedway events in 2004
Dale jr. would achieve what took his
father 20 years by winning the Daytona
500 in just his fifth attempt continues
jr. wins the 46th Daytona 500 following
the death of Dale Earnhardt NASCAR will
work to implement an unprecedented
amount of driver safety improvements
most notably the Hans device safer
barrier and carve tomorrow to make sure
that an accident like Dale Earnhardt's
could never happen again
[Music]
incredibly hard impact look at say look
at look at that safer berry right there
had just crushed all that stuff wave to
the fans my goodness and to this day
Dale Earnhardt still remains NASCAR's
last fatality unfortunately NASCAR's
great strides and drivers safety may be
the only positive news for the sport in
the past decade attendance sponsorships
and television ratings have all
drastically declined in the past ten
years leaving the few remaining fans to
wonder what exactly drove everyone away
some people blame the recent
mismanagement from Brian France and
other NASCAR executives some people
blame the chase and other gimmicks that
have alienated NASCAR's core fan base
some people blame the lack of
interesting or relatable drivers some
people blame the recession and how it
hit NASCAR's karate is the hardest
preventing them from going to races if
you ask me however the main reason so
many fans stopped watching NASCAR is
ironically because it got safer as
morbid as it is to say by removing the
inherent risk of racing NASCAR removed
the one thing that separated them from
all other sports today NASCAR drivers
have never been farther from the
snarling jaws of certain death and the
sport has been made far less compelling
as a result
I gave thanks the team runs across the
start/finish lines of the camp
that's what he's doing finished the race
and he did standing ovations from the
ground
shades of Ricky Bobby ever since that
fateful day NASCAR fans have been trying
to fill the void that Dale Earnhardt
left there's the driver who carried on
his name
Dale Earnhardt jr. following his
father's passing he became NASCAR's
perennial most popular driver until his
retirement in 2017 although he finished
with a respectable twenty six career
wins Dale jr. failed to capture a single
championship and could never live up to
his father's godlike legacy there's the
driver who carried on his car Kevin
Harvick who was able to capture at least
one championship and his own Daytona 500
victory a successful career for sure but
not much compared to Earnhardt's there's
the driver who carried on his title as
the seven-time champion Jimmie Johnson
who in 2016 became the third ever driver
to accomplish this feat while he is
statistically the best driver since
Earnhardt Johnson never managed to
appeal to the fans in the same way as
his relatively bland demeanor failed to
capture the hearts and minds of the
greater audience and then there's the
driver who carried on Earnhardt's number
after the tragedy Richard Childress
retired the number from active
competition for over a decade but he
brought it back in 2014 for the full
time Cup debut of his grandson Austin
Dillon in 2015 at the finish of the July
Daytona race Dillon would suffer a
gruesome looking accident where his car
was launched directly into the catch
fence for a brief moment every fan
watching tensed up in horror after
witnessing what they thought was the
second fatality in the three car at
Daytona incredibly Austin Dillon walked
away from this with only minor injuries
some have called him the luckiest driver
in NASCAR today but his luck hasn't
contributed to much success on the track
so far after five full time seasons
Dillon has only two wins to his name one
of those wins came in the 2018 Daytona
500 as twenty years after Earnhardt
storybook victory the three car returned
to Victory Lane at Daytona and Erica
with the number 320 years ago 20 years
of trying for Earnhardt he won the
Daytona 500
Austin Dillon wins the 60th running of
the great American race we're all
searching for the next Dale Earnhardt
but we know deep down that he's
irreplaceable many fans consider
Earnhardt the greatest NASCAR driver of
all time
possibly because we never got to see him
decline Dale Earnhardt remained one of
the best drivers in the sport till the
day he died and even then he still
finished ahead of 30 other drivers
everyone knows what it's like to be
stuck in bumper-to-bumper traffic and
all of us experienced the same desire to
break free from all the gridlock not
just from the traffic but from
everything responsibilities labor
Authority sometimes there's no better
feeling than seeing miles of open road
in front of you
Dale Earnhardt gave this feeling to
millions watching at home and seeing
Dale succeed made them believe they
could too for many Dale Earnhardt was a
real-life hero but most people will
never know his story most people only
know him as some guy who died they'll
never know about the turmoil the
struggle the determination the notoriety
the heartbreak or the triumph
they'll never care about any of it
because who could care about a bunch of
cars going round in circles
NASCAR may never be popular again
realistically it probably should have
never become popular in the first place
it's just a simple sport where no-name
Hillbillies gather to watch a bunch of
fast cars race each other but Dale
Earnhardt made it mean more than that
and for as long as NASCAR sticks around
stock car racing fans will always
remember the man in the black number
three because there will never ever be
another driver like him they got plenty
of money
don't need that to keep racing is it
worth the risk could keep on going sure
to win
[Music]
you